#summary 2D root density model based on Gerwitz and Page
#labels Subject-Daisy

Daisy includes a 2D root density model for row crops, based on Gerwitz and Page (1977). The model is quite simple, where Gerwitz and Pages showed a exponential decrease in root density with depth
{{{
    L(z) = L0 * exp(-a * z)
}}}
the 2D extension postulates a similar decrease with horizontal distance from the row
{{{
    L(x, z) = L00 * exp(-ax * |x|) * exp(-az * z)
}}}
where `L` is the root density, `x` is horizontal position with zero at the row, `z` is depth below surface, and `L0`, `L00`, `a`, `ax`, and `az` are constants.

Daisy will calculate the constants given information row geometry, specific root length, root density at the edge of the root zone, the width and depth of the root zone, and the total root mass. The root mass and the size of the root zone are dynamic in the model, the rest are static parameters. This is described in a [GP2Dpaper scientific article].

These calculations are also available in static form in a [GP2Dsheet Excel sheet].  This sheet can be used for either estimating the spatial distribution of root density from the root zone size and total root mass, or alternatively, for estimating root zone size and total root mass from measurements of root density.

Alternatively, you can use Daisy to calculate a static solution. You can find an example in the text file 'test-GP2D.dai' ([view http://code.google.com/p/daisy-model/source/browse/trunk/sample/test-GP2D.dai]) in the sample directory distributed together with Daisy.  The file should be self explaining. You run the example by dragging the file to the daisyw executable in the bin directory.  Or more comfortable from TextPad.

Here should be information about:

  * The Daisy `rootdens` model named `GP2D`.
  * The Daisy `program` model named `GP2D`.

The model was developed as part of the [SAFIR] project in order to better model and optimize [PRD] irrigation.