#summary Partial rootzone drying
#labels Subject-Daisy

= Introduction =

The basic idea behind partial rootzone drying (PRD) is that by keeping part of the rootzone dry, the plant will generate water stress hormones (ABA), which will cause the leaf stomata to close, which will reduce both transpiration and production.  For low concentrations, the reductions in transpiration will be much larger than the reduction in production, making it desirable in situation where water supply for irrigation is limited.

In practice, one divide the root zone for each plant in two side, and keep one side dry and the other wet, by selective irrigation.  The two sides must be switched during the irrigation period, to keep the effect working.

To support this in Daisy, a number of new models must be introduced:

  * Farquhar-Ball photosynthesis.
  * ABA effect on photosynthesis.
  * ABA production in the soil.
  * A 2D description of the soil.
  * A 2D description of the root distribution.

In Daisy version 4.31, a setup file named "test-prd.dai" can be found in the "sample" directory.  The file demonstrates how to enable all these models in order to simulate a PRD experiment. 

= Still missing in the short term =

In order to actually make usable predictions, some models and refinements must be implemented first:

  # Transpiration should be affected by the stomata conductivity calculated by the Farquhar-Ball model.  Currently, a simple energy balance is used, thus ignoring the positive effect on transpiration we want to achieve.
  # Initial growth should be fueled by seed density, rather than a forced LAI as is the case now.

= Long terms goals ==

These requires addition funding:

  # The user interface for specifying PRD should be simplified.
  # Better ABA effect models.







