#summary Division of soil pores into multiple domains.
#labels Subject-Daisy

= Primary, secondary and tertiary transport =

Intra-aggregate pores constitute the primary domain, and inter-aggregate pores the secondary domain.  Both the primary and secondary domain are dominated by cabalitory forces.  Pores large enough for the cabalitory forces to become insignificant constitute the tertiary domain.  The primary and secondary domain together also constitute the soil matrix.

In practice, this means we can use Richard's Equation for the soil matrix.  The convection-dispertion equation assumes equilibrium between pore sizes, which we doesn't believe is a good assumption between the primary and secondary domains.  Therefore, transport in each of those domains are considered seperate, with an exchange rate between them.

For the tertiary domain we cannot even use Richard's Equation.

= Secondary Domain =

The horizon parameter `secondary_domain` is used for enabling solute transport in the secondary domain.  The default is that no secondary domain exists.

= Tertiary Domain =

The tertiary transport mechanism is specified by `Tertiary` column parameter.  To get the old (pre-4.30) behavior, specify

  (Tertiary old)

This must be specified to get what used to be "default" behavior, that is macropore flow for horizons with more than 5% clay.  You can also specify the old macropore model directly, like this:

  (Tertiary old (macro none))

which has the same effect as 

  (Tertiary none)

The `macro` parameter used to be located under `SoilWater` under the same name, and was then moved to `Movement`.

The `old` tertiary model only works with the `vertical` movement model, therefore `none` is the default for now.

New models for tertiary transport are under active construction.