\documentclass[a4paper]{article}
\usepackage[latin1]{inputenc}
\usepackage{hyperref}
\usepackage{a4}
\usepackage{verbatim}
\input{macro}
\bibliographystyle{apalike}
\usepackage{graphicx}
\usepackage{latexsym}

\begin{document}

\title{\textbf{Initializing organic matter pools}}
\author{Per Abrahamsen, Søren Hansen and Henrik Svendsen\\
    The Royal Veterinary and Agricultural University\\
    Department of Agricultural Sciences\\
    Laboratory for Agrohydrology and Bioclimatology
}
\date{\today}
\maketitle

\begin{abstract}
  Organic matter models using multiple pools for soil biomass and soil
  organic matter have proved able to simulate both short term and long
  term change in humus content of agricultural soil.  However, these
  pools do not correspond to measurable physical quantities, and are
  therefore difficult for a non-expert to understand and use, and
  fragile with respect to changes in the model.  An alternative
  sometimes used is to assume the organic matter is in a state of
  equilibrium.  Unfortunately, the time to reach equilibrium is often
  measured in centuries, so this assumptions is unlikely to hold true.
  For the same reason, the use of a warmup period cannot replace the
  need for a good initial partitioning.  In this paper we propose a
  milder assumption, namely a quasi-equilibrium where all but the
  slowest pool is in equilibrium with the amount of carbon input.
  This assumption allows the non-expert user to initialize the model,
  and is robust with regard to model changes.
\end{abstract}

\tableofcontents

\section{Soil organic matter modelling}

It is conventional to divide the organic matter in the soil into three
fractions.  First we have the recently entered organic matter.  For a
cultivated soil, this might include organic fertilizer, crop
residuals, including rhizodeposition and dead leaves incorporated to
the soil by earthworms.  This fraction is called \emph{added organic
  matter}, or \textsc{aom}.  Then we have the \emph{soil microbial
  biomass}, or \textsc{smb}, the living part of the organic matter,
excluding roots.  Finally we have the humus, the \emph{soil organic
  matter} (\textsc{som}), which can no longer be traced back to its
origin.  The dynamics of the system consist of input in the form of
new added organic matter, and turnover in the form the soil biomass
eating the other matter (and itself).

In numeric models, these fractions may be further divided into smaller
pools, the content of each pool assumed by the model to have uniform
properties, e.g.\ similar turnover rate and C/N ratio.  Having two
\textsc{som} and two \textsc{smb} pools allows a well calibrated model
to capture both the short term (see SHORT-TERM-NEED-2-POOLS-PAPER) and
long term (LONG-TERM-NEED-2-POOLS-PAPER) dynamics of the system.  If
you are only interested in accuracy on a single time scale, less pools
may be needed.  The number of \textsc{aom} pools needed also depends
on what you are simulating.  For batch experiments and some long time
scenarios, a single pool may be enough.  To simulate input sources
from real farming, two pools per source are in general needed.

\section{\Daisy{}}

In several comparisons \cite{vereecken91-compar, willigen91-compar,
  diekkruger95-compar, smith97-compar} \daisy{} \cite{daisy-def,
  daisy-fertilizer, daisy-ems} has been among the best models for both
short and long term predictions of soil matter, and \daisy{} will be
the reference for the rest of this article.  Apart from soil organic
matter, \daisy{} also simulates a number of other processes outside
the scope of this article, such as water, heat and nitrogen dynamics
in the soil, as well as bioclimate, crop development and management.

The purpose of the \daisy{} model is to simulate real farming
practice, both on the short and the long term.  Thus, we get a system
with two pools for each of \textsc{som} and \textsc{smb}, and two
pools for each type of fertilizer applied and crop residual left on the
field.  The original model is depicted in figure~\ref{fig:om1}.

\begin{figure}[htbp]
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=0.8\hsize]{om1}

  \caption{The original \daisy{} OM parameterization.}
  \label{fig:om1}
\end{figure}

Figure~\ref{fig:om1} has 6 visible boxes, corresponding to the
\textsc{som}, \textsc{smb} and \textsc{aom} pools.  If you look at the
\textsc{som1} pool at the bottom left corner, you will see that it has
one line going out from it, marked with the text ``703y''.  This
indicate the speed the pool is being eaten by the soil biomass.  All
the pools have such a fully drawn outgoing line.  The amount of carbon
being eaten is directly proportional with the size of the pool.  We
call this the \emph{turnover rate}.  The number is the corresponding
halftime.  The \textsc{som1} pool thus have a halftime of 703 years,
meaning if there was no input it would be half the original size after
703 years.  For some pools this time is given in days, e.g.\ the
\textsc{smb2} pool has a turnover halftime of 69 days.
  
If we follow the line from \textsc{som1} it splits into two parts.
40\% is lost in digestion as CO$_2$, the rest is going to be new
biomass in the \textsc{smb1} pool.  If we look at the line going out
of the \textsc{som2} pool, we see that only 70\% of the carbon not
lost as CO$_2$ become biomass, the remaining 30\% end up in
\textsc{som1}.  The biomass pools have a turnover rate like the other
pools, but also a maintenance rate.  This reflects the cost of staying
alive, and is indicated by a stippled line out of the \textsc{smb}
pools.  The rates and even the number of \textsc{aom} pools are
variable, the rates given here are just examples.  Also, there can be
many sets of added organic matter pools, each set corresponding to
particular fertilizer or residual, and each with its own parameters.

What isn't depicted is the abiotic factors: clay, heat and moisture.
The halftimes given correspond to 0\% clay, 10$^\circ$C and field
capacity (pF 2).  The halftimes will be longer with more clay, lower
temperature, or dryer soil.  They will be shorter with higher
temperature.

\section{Evolution of the Daisy model}

The \daisy{} software allows the user to adjust all of these
parameters.  It also allows the user to specify the number of \textsc{som}
and \textsc{smb} pools, as well as the number of \textsc{aom} pools for each
fertilizer application and each crop residual type.  It thus provides
a good basis for experimentation.

The first such experimental change that made it back into \daisy{} was
made by Torsten Müller \cite{mueller-smb}, who adjusted the turnover
rates of the \textsc{smb} pools so the biomass content of the soil
better matched the levels measured at the fields.  The change did not
affect the long time dynamics of the system.  The second such change
was made by Sander Bruun \cite{daisy-somnew}.  The was a complete
recalibration that took into account the carbon input from
rhizodepositions.  This change was more radical, involving both
turnover rates and directions of flow, and made the system much more
adaptable to new levels of input, another effect which has also been
observed empirically \cite{dk-humus-change}.

The current model is depicted in~\ref{fig:om2}.  The purpose of the
\textsc{som3} pool in that figure will be explained later.

\begin{figure}[htbp]
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=0.8\hsize]{om2}
  
  \caption{New parameterization.}
  \label{fig:om2}
\end{figure}

Some of the experimental changes affecting soil organic matter that we
are currently working on, and which may be included in future versions
of \daisy{}, are dissolved organic matter \cite{bgj-dom}, another
recalibration based on a larger experimental database and with special
focus on the effect of clay \cite{biomod,biomod2}, and some wishlist
items include phosphor dynamics \cite{bgj-ptr} and a calibration for
forest soil.  The conclusion is that the model has changed in the
past, and will continue to change in the future.

\section{Expanding user base}

The original development of \daisy{} was founded by the Danish
environmental protection agency \cite{daisy-def}, and the first
non-research use was made by expert users who evaluated the national
environmental plans for limiting nitrogen contamination of groundwater
and surface water (see VMPuse).  Since then, \daisy{} has been used in
other parts of the environmental and agricultural agencies (see
\cite{novana} XXX), as well as increasingly by local authorities for
evaluating regional plans (see Århus Amt og XXX), and recently also
for evaluation of applications for changed farm practice at an
individual farm level (see VVM, \cite{plantinfo-daisy}).  For the last
case, \daisy{} has also been used by consulting agencies representing
``the other side'', namely farmers seeking permission to change
farming practice.

The effect of this increased use has been that we no longer can rely
on the users being experts.  Therefore, a project was started in order
to provide standardized procedures for \daisy{} simulations (see XXX).
As part of this project, most components of \daisy{} was evaluated in
order to find parameters and submodels which could be initialized
automatically from default values, or from other parameters.  These
parameters and submodels are still available to the expert user, but
will be hidden for the user who do not have the expertise or data
available.  The result is that the software now appears much simpler
to the user, even though no substantial changes to the model have been
made.

The partition of the organic matter into the various soil pools have
been a particular stumbling block for most users, partly because it
does not reflect an easily identifiable property of the system being
modelled.  

\section{Equilibrium}

It is common to use an equilibrium assumption for initializing models
where measurements are not available.  For example, in \daisy{} we
assume that the soil water in the bottom of the unsaturated zone is in
equilibrium with the groundwater, as specified by Darcy's equation.
There are two reasons equilibrium is often a good assumption.  For
some systems, it will be correct most of the time, because they quickly
reach equilibrium compared to the externally imposed changes.  In other
cases, the dynamic of the system quickly dominate over the initial
condition, so an equilibrium is good when we just need a reasonable
initial state, rather than a correct one.

As part of Sander's recalibration work, he also found that the ratio
between the \textsc{som1} and \textsc{som2} for a system in
equilibrium will 49\% vs 51\%.  Since \daisy{} after his recalibration
required users to readjust the partitioning between \textsc{som1} and
\textsc{som2}, there was a strong tendency that users just picked the
equilibrium values.

\section{Long term simulations}

As part of the standardization project mentioned earlier, We used
\daisy{} to simulate the effect on soil organic matter of changing
farming practice.  Figure~\ref{fig:clayom} shows humus content for a
system that goes from equilibrium at a high level of carbon input, to
equilibrium at a low level of carbon input.  Danish farming practice
has been used, as well as Danish climate and soil.  The soil has a for
Danish conditions high clay content (12\%).  Figure~\ref{fig:clayom}
also shows the simulated\footnote{Simulated values are on the dotted
  line.  The $\Diamond$'s and $+$'s indicate the initialization values
  for the current humus level chosen by two variants of the proposed
  quasi-equilibrium.} \textsc{som1} fraction of total \textsc{som}.
Finally, figure~\ref{fig:sandom} shows the a simulation on a COARSE
SANDY SOIL going from a low to high input equilibrium.

\begin{figure}[htbp]
  \centering
  \input{clayh2l.tex}
  \caption{Long term simulation of organic matter content (left axis)
    and \textsc{som1} fraction (right axis) from changing from high to
    low input on a CLAYISH LOAM.}
  \label{fig:clayom}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[htbp]
  \input{sandl2h.tex}
  
  \caption{Long term simulation of organic matter content (left axis)
    and \textsc{som1} fraction (right axis) from changing from low to
    high input on a SANDY SOIL.}
  \label{fig:sandom}
\end{figure}

As can be seen, the time to reach a new equilibrium after a change in
farming practice can be several centuries, which makes it safe to
assume that Danish farming land is not in equilibrium.  At such a time
scale, not only farming practice but also climate is going to change.

As a conclusion, we need a way to initialize the soil organic matter
that is robust with regard to changes in the model or model
parameterization, and at the same time expressible in terms of
physical properties the user can understand.  And we cannot use the
most obvious initialization condition, namely an equilibrium
assumption.

\section{Basic equations}

In order to find a better way to initialize the organic matter pools,
we will start by looking at the four equations describing their
internal relationships.
\begin{eqnarray}
  \Delta\mbox{\textsc{smb1}} &=& a\> \mbox{\textsc{smb1}} + b\>
  \mbox{\textsc{smb2}} + c\> \mbox{\textsc{som1}} + d\>
  \mbox{\textsc{som2}} + e\, \Delta\mbox{\textsc{aom}}\label{eq:dsmb1}\\
  \Delta\mbox{\textsc{smb2}} &=& f\> \mbox{\textsc{smb1}} + g\>
  \mbox{\textsc{smb2}} + h\> \mbox{\textsc{som1}} + i\>
  \mbox{\textsc{som2}} + j\, \Delta\mbox{\textsc{aom}}\\
  \Delta\mbox{\textsc{som1}} &=& k\> \mbox{\textsc{smb1}} + l\>
  \mbox{\textsc{smb2}} + m\> \mbox{\textsc{som1}} + n\>
  \mbox{\textsc{som2}} + o\, \Delta\mbox{\textsc{aom}}\\
  \Delta\mbox{\textsc{som2}} &=& p\> \mbox{\textsc{smb1}} + q\>
  \mbox{\textsc{smb2}} + r\> \mbox{\textsc{som1}} + s\>
  \mbox{\textsc{som2}} + t\, \Delta\mbox{\textsc{aom}}\label{eq:dsom2}
\end{eqnarray}
Here, we have excluded the \textsc{aom} pools, except as a source for
the other pools which we denote $\Delta\mbox{\textsc{aom}}$.
$\Delta\mbox{\textsc{aom}}$ is the total carbon input to the system.
The \textsc{aom} pools are special in that they are not feed by any of
the other pools, but by outside sources such as crop residuals and
fertilizer.  The other pools are described by content (\textsc{smb1},
\textsc{smb2}, \textsc{som1}, or \textsc{som2}) and change of content
($\Delta\mbox{\textsc{smb1}}$, $\Delta\mbox{\textsc{smb2}}$,
$\Delta\mbox{\textsc{som1}}$, $\Delta\mbox{\textsc{som2}}$).

The factors $a$ to $t$ depend on the model, so the factors are
different for the original model (figure~\ref{fig:om1}) and the Sander
recalibration (figure~\ref{fig:om2}).  They also depend on site and
time specific factors, namely the clay content of the soil, the
temperature, and the water potential.

Some of these factors may be zero, in none of the calibrations
mentioned we have any carbon going directly from the \textsc{aom}
pools to \textsc{som1}, so $o$ will always be zero.  We include these
anyway, because we are trying to solve the initialization problem in a
way that is robust with regard to changes in the model.  The
description is also robust with regard to the number of
pools\footnote{The generalized form used by the \daisy{} program is:
  \begin{displaymath}
    \begin{array}{rclcr}
      \Delta\mbox{\textsc{smb}}i &=& \displaystyle
      \sum_{k=1}^{\mbox{\tiny\#\textsc{smb}}} a_{i,k}\,\mbox{\textsc{smb}}k + 
      \sum_{l=1}^{\mbox{\tiny\#\textsc{som}}} b_{i,l}\,\mbox{\textsc{som}}l +
      c_i \Delta\mbox{\textsc{aom}} 
      &;&i = 1\ldots\mbox{\#\textsc{smb}}\nonumber\\
      \Delta\mbox{\textsc{som}}j &=& \displaystyle
      \sum_{k=1}^{\mbox{\tiny\#\textsc{smb}}} d_{j,k}\,\mbox{\textsc{smb}}k +
      \sum_{l=1}^{\mbox{\tiny\#\textsc{som}}} e_{j,l}\,\mbox{\textsc{som}}l +
      f_j \Delta\mbox{\textsc{aom}} 
      &;&j = 1\ldots\mbox{\#\textsc{som}}\nonumber
    \end{array}
  \end{displaymath}
}, adding a new pool will add one more equation, and two new unknowns.

Back to the two pool example.  We have four equations and nine
unknowns.  We need more information.  The first piece of information
we can add is the total organic matter content in the field, which can
be directly measured.  This gives us one new equation, and two new
variables.
\begin{equation}
  \label{eq:total}
  \mbox{\textsc{total}} = \mbox{\textsc{smb1}} + \mbox{\textsc{smb2}}
  + \mbox{\textsc{som1}} + \mbox{\textsc{som2}} + \mbox{\textsc{aom}}
\end{equation}
\textsc{total} is measured.  \mbox{\textsc{aom}}, the initial content
of added organic matter, is given a default value corresponding to
typical root residuals left from a crop.  We now need four more
equations\footnote{Everybody: Four more equations!  Four more
  equations!}, one for each pool.

\section{Quasi-equilibrium}

The equilibrium assumption corresponds to adding these four equations: 
\begin{displaymath}
  \Delta\mbox{\textsc{smb1}} = \Delta\mbox{\textsc{smb2}} 
  = \Delta\mbox{\textsc{som1}} = \Delta\mbox{\textsc{som2}} = 0
\end{displaymath}
Even though we earlier argued that it was not good for initializing
the system, we can use it to obtain an estimate of
$\Delta\mbox{\textsc{aom}}$, the carbon input level required to
maintain the measured amount of organic matter in the soil, which may
be interesting in itself, for example in a discussion about soil
quality or global change.

The initializing procedure we ended up using was to allows the slowest
pool (which happens to be \textsc{som1}) to change, but requires the
user to specify the carbon input to the system ($u$).  We then get:
\begin{eqnarray}
  \Delta\mbox{\textsc{smb1}} &=& 0\\
  \Delta\mbox{\textsc{smb2}} &=& 0\\
  \Delta\mbox{\textsc{som2}} &=& 0\label{eq:fastpooleq}\\
  \Delta\mbox{\textsc{aom}} &=& u
\end{eqnarray}

We now have nine equations with nine unknowns, and can initialize the
system.  The physical interpretation of this initialization is that
all but the slowest pool have reached a quasi-equilibrium with respect
to the input, and the size of the slowest pool.  Since the slowest
pool is still changing (and the other pools will have to change to
reflect that), this is not a true equilibrium.
Figure~\ref{fig:clayom} and~\ref{fig:sandom} shows that the fast pool
(\textsc{smb2}) does indeed adapt to changes in input much faster than
the slow pool (\textsc{smb1}), the hump in each graph is due to that
effect.

\section{User calibration}

We also have a model independent knob for users who want to calibrate
the system.  If the user can estimate the total rate of change in
carbon content, i.e.\ is the soil gaining or losing organic matter
with the specified input, we can substitute
equation~\ref{eq:fastpooleq} with
\begin{displaymath}
  \Delta\mbox{\textsc{smb1}} + \Delta\mbox{\textsc{smb2}} 
  + \Delta\mbox{\textsc{som1}} + \Delta\mbox{\textsc{som2}} = v
\end{displaymath}
where $v$ is the user specified change in carbon content.  Since our
users are generally more concerned with nitrogen than with carbon, we
ask them to specify the \emph{background mineralization} ($w$), which
is the amount of nitrogen the rest of the system gets or loses from
the soil.  The equation is then
\begin{displaymath}
  \frac{\Delta\mbox{\textsc{smb1}}}{{C/N}_{\mbox{\small\textsc{smb1}}}}
  + \frac{\Delta\mbox{\textsc{smb2}}}{{C/N}_{\mbox{\small\textsc{smb2}}}}
  + \frac{\Delta\mbox{\textsc{som1}}}{{C/N}_{\mbox{\small\textsc{som1}}}}
  + \frac{\Delta\mbox{\textsc{som2}}}{{C/N}_{\mbox{\small\textsc{som2}}}}
  = w
\end{displaymath}
Note that the simulated background mineralization will only be the
specified value ($w$) if the simulated carbon input also corresponds to
the specified value ($u$).  If we are simulating the effect of a
proposed change in management practice, this will not be the
case\footnote{Another caveat is that \daisy{} treat the $C/N$ for
  matter entering the \textsc{som} pools independently of the $C/N$
  leaving them.  The equation will only be correct when the two are
  close.}.


In conclusion, we can now initialize the soil organic matter system
from two or three numbers supplied by the user.  The two mandatory
numbers are the total content of organic matter, and an estimate of
how much carbon has been added to the system per year in the recent
decades.  The third, optional, number is the estimated background
mineralization.  The first number is directly measurable, the two
other can at least be understood by people who have no intimate
knowledge of the model, and can be estimated by the user, for example
from the use of \daisy{} simulations.  None of the these numbers need
to be changed when the model itself is changed.

\section{Abiotic factors}

In the equations~\ref{eq:dsmb1} to~\ref{eq:dsom2} we used a large number
of constants, without indicating how we calculate them.  Here is the
formula for calculating $a$ from the first equation.
\begin{displaymath}
  a = (t_{\mbox{\tiny\textsc{smb1}}}\,
  (X_{\mbox{\tiny\textsc{smb1}}\rightarrow{\mbox{\tiny\textsc{smb1}}}}\,
  E_{\mbox{\tiny\textsc{smb1}}}
  - 1) - m_{\mbox{\tiny\textsc{smb1}}})\,
  F_{\mbox{\tiny\textsc{smb1}}}^T (T)\,
  F_{\mbox{\tiny\textsc{smb1}}}^\psi (\psi)\,
  F_{\mbox{\tiny\textsc{smb1}}}^C (X_c)
\end{displaymath}
The other constants have a similar form.
$t_{\mbox{\tiny\textsc{smb1}}}$ is the turnover rate for the
\textsc{smb1} pool.
$X_{\mbox{\tiny\textsc{smb1}}\rightarrow{\mbox{\tiny\textsc{smb1}}}}$
is the carbon fraction going from \textsc{smb1} back to \textsc{smb1}.
$E_{\mbox{\tiny\textsc{smb1}}}$ is the efficiency of which
\textsc{smb1} can be digested, the remaining part will be lost as
CO$_2$.  $m_{\mbox{\tiny\textsc{smb1}}}$ is the maintenance cost of
the \textsc{smb1} pool. $F_{\mbox{\tiny\textsc{smb1}}}^T$,
$F_{\mbox{\tiny\textsc{smb1}}}^\psi$, and
$F_{\mbox{\tiny\textsc{smb1}}}^C$ are the abiotic factors for soil
heat, moisture and clay respectively.  All of these are part of the
model calibration, and unchanged for all normal use of the model.

What does change is the soil temperature ($T$), soil moisture
($\psi$), and clay content ($X_c$).  The clay content is constant
during the time-scales we work on, and is specified by the user.  So
the two problematic terms are $T$ and $\psi$ which are variable during
the simulation.  For the initialization we must use constant values.
By default we use the average temperature for the site (which is
already specified by the user and used elsewhere in the model) for
$T$, and field capacity (pF 2) for $\psi$.  As $F^T$ is non-linear,
using the average is incorrect.  In particular, $F^T$ is zero for $T <
0^\circ$C, so for a cold climate like the Danish the significance of
frost is overestimated.  On the other hand, using pF 2 may be
acceptable for the wet climate like in Denmark, but may be
unreasonable for a dry climate.  The two factors interact, so a low
value for $F^T (T)$ is most significant when $F^\psi (\psi)$ is high,
and vice-versa.  So in effect we can treat $T$ and $\psi$ as
calibration parameters when using \daisy{} in a different climate.  By
logging the product of factors in a realistic simulation, \daisy{} can
be used to calculate the combined effect.  From that, the user can
choose values for $T$ and $\psi$ that give the same effect.

\section{Inert organic matter}

The current \daisy{} model calibration is based primarily on
measurements on agricultural topsoil \cite{daisy-somnew,mueller-smb},
where all the 
humus is presumed to be active.  This means the calibration is not
good for subsoils, nor for some types of humus-rich topsoils.  The
\textsc{som3} pool you last saw in figure~\ref{fig:om2} exists to
compensate for these shortcomings.  The \textsc{som3} pool is inert,
so for the soil organic matter system it is as if it didn't exist.  It
still affects other aspects of \daisy{}, such as the hydraulic and
adsorption properties of the soil.

For the subsoil, we by default assume the system is in equilibrium
with the input, and park enough humus in the \textsc{som3} pool so
that this assumption holds true.  The observant reader will remember
that we earlier argued that the equilibrium assumption is wrong.  It
still is, also for the subsoil.  However, the subsoil contribute
relatively little to the total system (XXX), so we can get away with
this assumption.  For topsoil, the user can explicitly park some of
the humus in the \textsc{som3} pool, if he has reason to believe it to
be necessary.

\section{Comparisons}

PA: Diskution af fig3 og 4 quasi-eq

PA: Overvej initialisering med ``background mineralization = 0''.

PA: Ref til \cite{daisy-init}.

\section{Limitations}

When using the current input levels, the quasi-equilibrium assumption
will give very poor, even physically impossible estimates right after
a large change in input level.  This is because the \textsc{som2} pool
will not yet have had any chance to adopt to the new input level.
With the current model, the \textsc{som2} pool needs several decades
to catch up with changes in input.  This means the quasi-equilibrium
assumption is still suspect in a modern agricultural country like
Denmark, but it is still better than the equilibrium assumption that
needs centuries rather than decades.

A model specific bound on the relative size of \textsc{som1} has been
introduced.  Our long term simulations has shown that the
\textsc{som1} fraction stay within the interval 30\% --- 70\%.  If the
quasi-equilibrium give a value outside that interval, the
\textsc{som1} fraction will be set to that nearest boundary, and the
initialization will be redone\footnote{More precisely, if the
  quasi-equilibrium gives a \textsc{som1} higher than 70\%,
  equation~\ref{eq:dsom2} will be replaced with the new equation
  \begin{displaymath}
    \mbox{\textsc{som1}} = 70\%\> (\mbox{\textsc{som1}} + \mbox{\textsc{som2}})
  \end{displaymath}
  and similar for a \textsc{som1} below 30\%.}.

While the humus content in especially figure~\ref{fig:sandom}
fluctuates with rotation, season and climate, the simulated
\textsc{som1} fraction stay relatively stable.  This is because most
of the minor fluctuations happens in the \textsc{aom} and \textsc{smb}
pools, the slower \textsc{som2} does not have time to adapt.  This
also explains the relatively noise on the initialization points, the
quasi-equilibrium assumption over-adapts to such short terms changes.

\addcontentsline{toc}{section}{\numberline{}References}
\bibliography{daisy}

\end{document}

%%% Local Variables: 
%%% mode: latex
%%% TeX-master: t
%%% End: 
