\documentclass[a4paper]{article}

\usepackage[left=1cm,top=2cm,right=1cm]{geometry}
\usepackage[latin1]{inputenc}
\usepackage[T1]{fontenc}
\usepackage{natbib}
\bibliographystyle{apalike}
\usepackage{graphicx}
\usepackage{hyperref}
\usepackage{fancyhdr}
\usepackage{placeins}
\usepackage{comment}
\pagestyle{fancy}
\lhead{\today}

\includeonly{}
\includecomment{text}
%%\excludecomment{text}

\begin{document}

\begin{text}

\section*{Daisy simulation of Silstrup and Estrup}

The Danish Pesticide Leaching Assessment Programme (PLAP) has been
monitoring drain and soil water since 1999 in six different locations
in order to evaluate the leaching risk of pesticides.  The drain water
measurements pesticides are found in some drain water measurements,
but not in the horizontal filters 3.5 meter below surface.

In order to better understand the system, and eventually how the
measurements can be better used for assessing potential risk of
contamination of drinking water, the Daisy agricultural model has been
extended with support for those processes we assume are relevant for
transport of pesticides from surface to drain pipes.

To test our understanding as embedded in the model, as well as the
applicability for the PLAP sites, a pilot project with two PLAP sites,
four pesticides, and two years of data have been modelled.  Our
hypothesis is here that we can explain the measured data with the
model.

The most significant measured results are from the Estrup site, so
that was fixed as the first site.  We wanted to use the same years for
both sites to see the results of similar climate on two different
locations.  Hourly weather data from the site had to be present, both
for the modelling period and one growth season before for warmup.  The
initial choice of Fårdrup for the second site was rejected as it was
not possible to get sufficient quality weather data.  Furthermore, we
wanted to the same pesticides on both sites, and both weakly and
strongly sorbing pesticides represented.  Glyphosate had to be one of
them

Based on these criteria, we chose Silstrup and Estrup, drain seasons
2000-2001 and 2001-2002, with the pesticides glyphosate, fenpropimorph,
dimethoate, and metamitron.

Both sites are described in detail in \citet{lindhardt2001}, with an
overview of the measured data found in \citet{vap2009}.  Estrup is an
extremely heterogeneous site, containing both areas with sand and
clay, peat, thin layers of chalk, and even sand from railroad
construction.  Silstrup is also heterogeneous, but less so, with high
levels of clay dominating the area.

\section{Model setup}

\subsection{Weather}

Hourly weather data for Silstrup, Tylstrup and Askov (near Estrup) was
provided by the Faculty of Agricultural Sciences, Aarhus University.
The idea was that Tylstrup data could be used to supplement holes in
the Silstrup data.  Both the Silstrup and Askov data sets contained
several short holes.  We filled those by using values from the
preceding or following hours.  The Silstrup data set ended at
2002-03-12.  The drain season ended 2002-03-20, with 0.6 mm water
collected from the drains the last 8 days.  Baring this in mind, we
chosed to end the simulation 2002-03-11, rather than continue with
data from another station.

The weather data contained air temperature, wind speed, relative
humidity, precipitation, and global radiation are used.  Based on
these data, Daisy can use FAO version of Penman-Monteith equation
\citep{FAO-PM} to calculate reference evapotranspiration (ET0).  From
that, Daisy will calculate potential evapotranspiration (ETc) by using
the crop leaf area index (LAI) with Beer's law to dividing the surface
into canopy and bare soil, and using different factors for each
fraction.  Based partly on \citet{kjaersgaard2008crop}, crop factor of
1.2 and a bare soil factor of 0.6 was chosen.  Actual
evapotranspiration (ETa) is further limited by the capability of the
root system and soil surface to extract water from the soil.

Precipitation, air temperature, ETc and ETa can be seen on
figures~\ref{fig:Silstrup-weather} and~\ref{fig:Estrup-weather}.

\subsection{Management}

All management data were provided by GEUS.

\subsubsection{Tillage}

Date, type, and depth were specified for all tillage operations.  All
three were entered into Daisy.  In Daisy, the main effects of tillage
are to incroporate some of the surface material into the soil
(depending on the type of tillage operation), and to mix the content
of the soil in the specified depth.  This is not expected to affect
pesticide leaching much.  In the real world, the main effect of
tillage applicable to pesticide leaching is likely to be a change in
the hydraulic properties for the top soil resulting from the tillage
operation.  Since we chose to implement dynamic hydraulic soil
properties for the Silstrup soil surface, the tillage information were
useful there as well.

\subsubsection{Fertilization}

Date, type, and amount were specified for each fertilization event, as
well as N, P and K content of fertilizer.  Of these nutrients, Daisy
can normally only handle N, and N has been disabled for these
simulations to save time.  All fertilization event have been added to
Daisy, but without N there will be no effect of the mineral
fertilizer.  The organic fertilizer will have a minimal effect, the
water content of the fertilizer will be added, and the dry matter
content will be added to the litter where it can catch water and
pesticides, until it become incroporated into the soil by either
tillage operations or earthworm activity.  However, due to the timing
of the applications, both effect is likely to be negigible.

\subsubsection{Crop management}

Table

No attempt to match harvest (except "no severe stress")

Fodder beet -> Spring Barley

\subsubsection{Pesticide application}

Date, amount, commercial name

Database

\begin{verbatim}

* Chemistry

colloids

Footprint & FOCUS

* Soil

** Lindhart, MACRO

** Biopores, cracks

** OM \& N

** Surface, plow pan

\end{verbatim}
\section{Results}

\end{text}

% \section*{Daisy simulation figures for Silstrup og Estrup}

\include{figs-Silstrup}

\include{figs-Silstrup-2D}

\include{figs-Estrup}

\include{figs-Estrup-2D}

\begin{text}
\section{Discussion}

\begin{verbatim}
* Silstrup drain period may be too short due to heterogenity.

* Silstrup drain flow follow first rain, indicate surface flow and anisotropy

* Silstrup Metamitron not påvirket af halverinsgtid
\end{verbatim}

\section{Conclusion and further work}

It is possible to explain the measured data based on the processes
included in the present model, with some caveats
\begin{itemize}
\item The high degree of heterogeneity found in the Estrup site would
  require a detailed 3D model of the entire area to model
  mechanistically, the current 2D model setup can at best be viewed as
  ``effective parameters''.
\item The drain are activated more abruptly (first year) and sooner
  (second year) in reality, than what we have been able to simulate
  for the Silstrup site.  This is particularly noticeable for the
  Bromide measurements.  
\item Bromide is found in some of the horizontal filters at 3.5 meters
  depth at both sites in the first measurements after application of
  Bromide.  No pesticides are found in those depth though.  It does
  indicate a transport way for non-sorbing solutes that we cannot
  model.  One possibility is large scale fractures, this suggestion is
  supported by other work at GEUS.
\end{itemize}

Furthermore, the work presented in thus report cannot count as a
validation of either the parametrization or the conceptual model,
there are too many unknowns where we have had to guess or calibrate
parameters, and there are likely many different setups that would have
resulted in as good or better fits to the measured results.  It is not
certain that a proper validation is possible, but by applying the
model on more data sets we should be able to gain confidence in it it.

Apart from applying the model on more and larger data sets, two areas
in particular need further work.
\begin{itemize}
\item The surface processes (flow, litter storage, decomposition) are
  very important, especially for the Silstrup site, but only the
  minimal work on those to get an effect have been done in this project.
\item The pesticide processes (colloid transport, sorbtion sites,
  sorption kinetics, and decomposition) are parametrized from
  literature values and ``best guesses'', many of those parameters
  should be adapted to direct local measurements.
\end{itemize}

\addcontentsline{toc}{section}{\numberline{}References}
\bibliography{../../txt/daisy}

\end{text}
  
\end{document}
