* NEWS --- Changes in the Daisy program and libraries -*- outline -*-

This file contains an overview of changes between Daisy source
releases.  Please note that the version numbers for binary releases
are less accurate, for example a binary version '1.40' may contain
some of the changes listed here under '1.41'.  You can get the version
number of the binary with the command 'daisy -v', or 'cdaisy -v' for
the daisy DLL.

When you upgrade Daisy, it is recommended that you read at least the
headlines af the changes since the last version.  For more detailed
information on changes, read the 'ChangeLog' file from the source
release.

* 2.21

** Added cross references to reference manual.

In particular, add information about where each component, model,
parameterization and submodel is used.

* 2.20

** Change the way to specify chemicals for logging.

You can now use a (set "$chem" Atrazine) parameter for "Surface
Chemicals", "Soil Chemicals" or "Chemicals" to log Atrazine alone, or
leave it out to log the sum of all chemicals in the soil.  As part of
this cleanup, the "Chemical" and "Soil Chemical" parameterizations has
been moved to 'log-old.dai'.

Also, Daisy will now automatically delay the Chemicals log until the
chemical enters the soil.  This means the number of columns will be
correct from start.  

** Change the way to specify organic matter for logging.

Update the "Total Soil Content", "N Balance", AOM and Bioincorporation
log parameterizations.  For AOM, use like (set "$am" "grass/roots") to
log a specific AOM.  Compared to before, the "?" is missing.

* 2.18

** Daisy now creates a daisy.log file.

It contains most of the information printed during the run.

* 2.17 

** Fixed many (small) memory leaks.

Also added workaround for a memory bug in Groundwater pipe, and fixed
some uninitialized variables in svat PMSW.

** More cleanup in log.dai.

As usual, look in log-old.dai for missing log parameterizations, and
remember to use an explicit "when" if you don't want hourly values.

** New warnings and errors on invalid input.

* 2.16

** New "Prod RtDR_T_factor" parameter to the default crop model.

Temperature dependent factor for root death rate.

Use it like this

(defcrop MyGrass Grass 
  (Prod (RtDR_T_factor (0.0 0.0) (10.0 1.0))))

The will stop root death when soil soil freeze, and let it gradually
grow to full power when the soil temeprature reached 10 dg C.

** New PrecipCorrect keyword for the default weather model.

Add a 

  PrecipCorrect: 1.12 1.10 1.00 1.20 1.40 1.60 1.12 1.10 1.00 1.20 1.40 1.60

to the keyword section of your .dwf file to get mothly correction for
the precipitation.  The Precip-Correct should be followed by 12
numbers, each a factor to multiply to the precipitation for that
month.  The first number corresponds to January, the last to December.

** Made "Soil Temperature" and "Surface Water Balance"log models hourly.

** Moved "Daily Water Flux" and "Hourly Water Flux" to 'log-old.dai'.

* 2.15

** Amount of solute in drainage was entirely wrong.  Fixed.

** Moved all V1 crop parameterizations to 'crop-old.dai'.

** New soil_water_content_above condition.

See the section about irrigation in the tutorial for an example.

** Updated the pig_slurry and cattle_slurry parameterizations. 

** New pig_manure, cattle_manure, and horse_manure parameterizations.

** Updated Rye, Sugar Beet, and Spring Rape parameterizations.

** Renamed Maize to Pioneer Maize, and added new Maize parameterization.

The new maize is a sort common in Denmark.

** New Pendimethalin pesticide.

** New Potato crop parameterization.

** The reference manual is improved.

It now list standard parameterizations, and index all component,
model, submodel, attribute and parameterization names.  The
introduction is also updated.

* 2.14

** Fixed bug introduced in previous version that disabled macropores.

** Made check for mass balance more robust.

* 2.12

** Fixed error with extra CH2O in the default crop model.

It should not have measurable effect on production, but could produce
warnings during simulation.

** Made the default mactrans model more numerically robust.

This also removed some rare warnings during simulation, but has no
effect on the results.

* 2.11

** Fixed mass balance error in mineralization.

When removing tiny organic matter pools, their remaining C was
incorporated into the SOM, but not their N.  This could add up to 1 kg
N inbalance over 10 years under some circumstances.

** Imobilization is now restricted by available nitrogen.

It used to run on full speed, even when there was no nitrogen to
immobilize.

** Fixed bug in the Cosby hydraulic model.

The estimated conductivity was far too low to be useful.

** The cd transport model can switch to smaller timesteps.

This will happen in the cases where it gave negative answers, and
eliminates the "BUG: M[0] = -1.4115e-7 after transport" messages.  The
effect of the bug would be a slightly too low estimate on leaching for
nitrogen starved systems.

* 2.09

** There is now an index of logable variables in the reference manual.

** The 'default' bioclimate model is now default.

I.e., you don't have to specify it explicitly.

** If you don't specify DSnew in the default crop model, it will use 
the stub length to calculate the DS after a cut. 

* 2.08

** Fix bug preventing macropores and drainage to be used together.

** Fix checkpoints.

** You can now specify [d^-1] instead of [h^-1].

** You can now specify fractions with [%].

* 2.07 

** New "Cosby_et_al" hydraulic model.

This is a modified Bruce Campell model with parameters derived by
pedotransfer functions as specified by Cosby et al.

This model is now default, so you don't have to specify hydraulic
parameters for a horizon (you should, though, the pedotranspher
functions aren't that reliable.)

* 2.06 

** You can now specify [m] or [pF] instead of [cm].

** Syntax for specifying dimensions in arrays changes.

Dimensions now applies only to numbers before them.  For example:

  (foo 10.0 20.0 [cm] 1.0 1.5 [m] 100.0)

Here the two first entries (10.0 and 20.0) are in cm,  the two next
(1.0 and 1.5) are m, and the last is whatever the default dimension
for foo is.

* 2.05 

** New 'linear' Pedotransfer model.

This allows you to to specify parameters as a linear function of
horizon attributes.  Here is an example:

(defpedotransfer "van der Zee & van Riemsdijk" linear
  (description "0.5 (Al_0 + Fe_O)")
  (factors ("Al_O" 0.5)
	   ("Fe_O" 0.5))
  (offset 0.0))
	   
(deftransform "Phosphor Fast<->Slow" equilibrium
  "Phosphor Fast" "Phosphor Slow"
  (equilibrium Langmuir
	       (K 1e-5 [g/cm^3])
	       (pedo_my_max "van der Zee & van Riemsdijk")
	       )
  (k_AB 1e-4))

Currently only the 'K' and 'my_max' attributes to the Langmuir
equilibrium model, and the 'k_AB' and 'k_BA' attributes to the
equilibrium transform model can be specified with pedotransfer
functions. 

The "Al_O" and "Fe_O" attributes must be specified in the horizon,
like this:

(defhorizon top default
  (attributes ("Fe_O" 1e-5)
	      ("Al_O" 5e-6)
  ...)

* 2.04

** Transformations.

You can now create arbitrary transformations between soil chemicals. 

Example:

(defcolumn test default
  (Transformations (equilibrium "Phosphor Solute" "Phosphor Solid"
				(equilibrium Langmuir
					     (K 1e-5 [g/cm^3])
					     (my_max 1e-2 [g/cm^3]))
				(k_AB 1e-2 [h^-1])))
  ...)

Right now, "equilibrium" is the only implemented transform model.  It
transforms towards an equilibrium, using k_AB (and k_BA) as speed.
k_BA are by default the same as k_AB.

Langmuir is the only implemented equilibrium model.  

All the numeric parameters (K, my_max, k_AB, k_BA) are arrays, so they
can differ for each soil interval.  There are "pedo_" versions
(pedo_K, etc.) of them all, making it possible to specify them using
pedotransfer functions.  No pedotransfer functions are currently
implemented. 

** New "full" adsorbtion model

Use it with "none" transport to get non-solute soil chemicals.

** New "solid" standard chemical parameterization.

It uses the full adsorbtion model together with the "none" transport. 

** New "Soil Chemical" log parameterization.

These allows you to log a single soil chemical.

** New "Transform" log parameterizations.

This allows you to log transformations.

** Bug fixes.

* 2.03

** You can now specify dimensions for numbers in input files.

The dimensions are in brackets, like this:

(defhorizon top default
  (hydraulic M_vG 
	     (K_sat 19.3 [cm/h])
	     (Theta_res 0.05 [cm^3 H2O/cm^3])
	     (Theta_sat 0.424 [cm^3 H2O/cm^3])
	     (alpha 0.069 [cm^-1])
	     (n 1.527 []))
  (SOM_fractions 0.66 [] 0.34 [])
  (SOM_C_per_N 11 [g C/g N] 11))

You must write the dimension exactly as is specified in the manual,
with the convention that ^ is used for superscript.  Also, fractions
and dimensionless values are both denoted as [].  Some values in Daisy
have unknown or unbspecified dimensions in the manual.  For these,
Daisy will accept any dimension in the input files, as long as it
start with a question mark.

There are no conversions yet, only the dimension used in the manual
may be specified.  In a furture release, Daisy will be able to make
some simple conversions, like [m] to [cm], allowing you to use what is
most convenient in the input file.

For arrays, if you specify the dimension for an entry (like
SOM_C_per_N in the example), that dimension is assumed to apply to the
rest as well, until something 

* 2.02

** You can now check on temperature sums.

To sow spring barley after the temperature sum reaches 110 dg C d,
write:

    (wait (TSum_above 110))
    (sow SpringBarley)

TSum is the sum of the daily average air temperature, ignoring frosty
days.  By default, it is reset March 1 every year.  

* 2.01

** New root density models

*** DS_Depth

Example:

    (sow "Spring Barley"
	 (Root (rootdens "DS_Depth" 
			 (entries (0.0 (0.0 1.0) (10.0 0.0))
				  (1.0 (0.0 1.0) (50.0 0.0))
				  (2.0 (0.0 1.0) (40.0 1.0) (50.0 0.0))))))

This specifies the root distribution at DS 0.0 (emergence), 1.0
(flowering) and 2.0 (ripe) respectively.  At all times, the highest
density is at the top.  At emergence, the density diminish linearly
until 10 cms depth, below that there is no root.  At flowering, it
still diminish linearly, now down to 50 cm.  At ripe, it has maximum
desnity down to 40 cm, at which point it diminish linearly downto 50
cm. 

Daisy will interpolate between these three development stages.

*** DS_Rel

Example:

    (sow "Spring Barley"
	 (Root (rootdens "DS_Rel" 
			 (entries (0.0 (0.0 1.0) (1.0 0.0))
				  (1.0 (0.0 1.0) (1.0 0.0))
				  (2.0 (0.0 1.0) (0.8 1.0) (1.0 0.0))))))

This works like DS_Depth, except that instead of using absolute
numbers for soil depth, we now use numbers relative to the current
potential root depth, as calculated by the root submodel.  With
DS_Depth, the calculated root depth is ignored.

*** Depth_Depth

    (sow "Spring Barley"
	 (Root (rootdens "Depth_Depth" 
			 (entries (00.0 (0.0 1.0) (10.0 0.0))
				  (50.0 (0.0 1.0) (50.0 0.0))
				  (75.0 (0.0 1.0) (40.0 1.0) (75.0 0.0))))))

This works like DS_Depth, except that instead of using the development
stage as index, we now use the calculated root depth.  Obviously, this
doesn't work when the root distribution change while the root depth
remain constant, as implied by the DS_Depth example.

In general, it is recommended that DS_Depth or Depth_Depth is used
when actual measurements has been made, and DS_Rel is used for general
xscrop parameterizations since soil conditions may prevent the root from
reaching the same depth as the measured values.

* 2.00

** GNU/Linux i386 port.

* 1.99

** Harvest cut_delay in the default crop model changed.

It is now a function of the amount of dry matter removed (measured in
kg/ha), rather than of the fraction of dry matter removed.

This affects none of the standard parameterizations.

** Harvest cut_delay now limits development as well as production.

** Crop height is now limited by WStem in the default crop model.

The Canopy parameter 'HvsWStem' put an upper limit on the crop height
based on WStem, relative to the crop height at flowering.  By default,
it need 200 g DM / m^2 to reach full height.

This affects stem and leaf harvest for monocrops, and light
competition for multicrops.

** Change LAI distribution in default crop parameterizations.

LAIDist0 and LAIDist1, which controls how the leafs are distributed
vertically, have been modified for all parameterizations of default
crop model to something that makes more sense.  

This will only affect leaf harvest for most simulations, but have
great effect for grass with multiple cuts, and for multicrops.

** You can now set MinDens in the Gerwitz+Page74 root density model.

** New "Root Density" log model.

* 1.98

** Better errors for (some) illegal parameter values.

You now get line and column number for where they appeared.  

Lots of code was changed to do this, so if some of the errors seem
wrong, let me know.

* 1.97

No user visible changes.

* 1.96

** New 'cut_stress' factor in the standard crop model.

After a cut production may be delayed for some days, depending on how
large a fraction that was removed.

(defcrop "Grass with Cut Delay" Grass 
  (Harvest (cut_delay (0.4 7) (0.8 28))))

** Bug fixes.

* 1.95

** Bug fixes.

* 1.94

** Log file change.  

Moved remaining CrpAux variables to Prod in the standard crop model.
The log.dai file has been updated.

* 1.93

** Log file change.  

StemRes was moved from CrpAux to Prod in the standard crop model.

* 1.92

** Log file change.  

Phenology has been merged into Devel in the default crop model.  This
mean log parameterizations logging DS must be updated.  

A number of log variables have been moved from CrpAux to CrpN in the
default crop model.  The most likely to be logged are Fixated and
AccFixated. 

The parameterizations in 'log.dai' has been updated.

** "N Balance" now logs fixation.

* 1.91

** Added description string for fertilizer parameterizations.

* 1.90

** Now give better error old style root AOM initialization.

** Deposition is now logable, and logged in "N Balance".

* 1.89

** Root density is now a component.

This means that the 'SpRtLength' and 'DensRtTip' root parameters have
changed, and that parameterizations that sets these must be updated.

Instead of 

(defcrop MyCrop default
  ;; ...
  (Root (SpRtLength 100.0)
        (DensRtTip 0.1)

use 

(defcrop MyCrop default
  ;; ...
  (Root (rootdens "Gerwitz+Page74"
		  (SpRtLength 100.0)
		  (DensRtTip 0.1))

If you don't have any better value for SpRtLength or DensRtTip than
the above, you don't need to specify them.  They are the default
values.
 
* 1.88

** "N Balance" and "Carbon Balance" now contains harvest information.

* 1.87

** Mark "CrpN SeedN" as obsolete in default crop model.

Use "Prod NCrop" instead.  You will need to update the crop library to
get rid of the warnings.

** Make it possible to log nitrogen added with seeds.

It has been added to the "Fertilizer" log parameterization.

** Lots of updates to the log parameterizations.

* 1.86

** Count initial AOM when estimating initial SMB.

** By default, assume 1.2 t DM/ha old root residuals at initialization.

To disable, specify an empty value for "am" in OrganicMatter.

The effect if the above two changes is a much reduced need for a
"warming period" at the start of the simulation. 

** The syntax for "root" AM has changed, everything has default values.

Typically, you would just override the "weight" variable with your own
estiimate.

* 1.85

** New top level attributes "directory" and "path".

You can now specify where Daisy shall put log files, and where it
shall look for input files, directly from the ".dai" file.  The
following should be put near the top of the dai file:

   (directory "C:/my/daisy/setup/output")
   (path "." "C:/my/daisy/setup" "C:/daisy/lib")

This will make Daisy run in the directory "/my/daisy/setup/output" (or
"C:\my\daisy\setup\output"), and also generate its log files there.

It will search for input files first in the directory where it run
("." means "current directory"), if it doesn't find them there it will
look in "C:\my\daisy\setup", and if it isn't there either, it will
finally look in "C:\daisy\lib" before giving up.

PS: Remember to use "/" instead of "\" for file names in ".dai" files.

** Bug fixes.

* 1.83

** More Borland work.

** Don't log C harvest per default.

* 1.82

The harvest log model now gives information about the carbon content.

* 1.80

** Now compiles with C++Builder 5.0 via the commandoline and Cygwin make

** Now includes a C++Builder 5.0 project file.

** Now compiles out of the box with Cygwin and "make daisy.exe"

** Bug fixes.

* 1.79

** Log the evapotranspiration used, not just the one in the weather file.

** Bug fix: ignored last root node in some circumstances.

* 1.78

** Keep track of C in crop.

Note: This means the CStem, CDead, CSOrg, CRoot and CLeaf harvest
parameters of the standard crop module can no longer be set.  Instead
set the E_Leaf, E_Stem, E_SOrg, E_Root production parameters.  You can
also log the C content with the CStem, CSOrg, CRoot and CLeaf in
production. 

* 1.77

** Ported to GCC 3.0

** You can now plant emerged crops.  

Define the crop like below, and use the normal "sow" command.

(defcrop "Maize for Planting" "Maize"
 (Phenology (DS 0.269081))
 (Prod (CH2OPool 12.6672)
       (NCrop 1.41396)
       (WLeaf 15.7116)
       (WRoot 26.4654)
       (WStem 10.9263))
 (Root (Depth 51.9679)))

* 1.76

Fix logging state for 'with-column'.

* 1.75

Fix logging of speed in Bioincorporation.

* 1.74

** More flexible dimensions in logs.

The character & in a dimension string in a log description will be
replaced by "h" if you use "hourly" (with no arguments) as a log
condition, "d" if you use "daily" (with no arguments) as a log
condition, "w" if you use "weekly" (with no arguments) as a log
condition, "m" if you use "monthly" (with no arguments) as a log
condition, "y" if you use "yearly" (with no arguments) as a log
condition, and "dt" otherwise.  All the standard log descriptions
have been updated to use "&".

This means that if you for example put

  (output ("N Balance" (when weekly)))

in your setup, "N Balance" will be logged weekly, and the flux
dimensions will be correct.

** Fixed off-by-one error for flux bottom in logs.

* 1.73

Fixed logging incorporated inorganic matter.

* 1.72

Fixed some dimension strings.

* 1.71

Fixed bug in PMSW checkpointing.

* 1.69 

Fixed bug in Penman-Monteith.

* 1.68

NH4 Volatilization is now in the Fertilizer log.

* 1.66

Disabled 'old' and 'old2' hydraulic models, and 'file' and 'hourly'
weather models.

* 1.60

** New 'EpFacDS' Canopy parameter.

This PLF allow the crops potential evapotranspiration adjustment to
depend on the development stage of the crop.

* 1.59

** Checkpoints should work now.

* 1.58

** Tillage can now affect background mineralization.

See the 'som_tillage_factor', 'smb_tillage_factor' and 'tillage_age'
xbparameters to 'OrganicMatter'.

* 1.55

** New 'density' flag to the 'interval' select method for logging.

Set 'density' to true to make Daisy log the average (in height)
content of the interval, rather than the total content.

** Fixed bad initialization crash.

Found by ML.

** The PM pet module now gives more realistic results.

Bugs found by SH.

* 1.54

** Adjusted DSLAI05 in 'Grass' parameterization.

Should give larger initial harvest.

** The ScreenHeight weather parameter is now respected.

This affects the 'PM' potential transpiration model.

* 1.51

** Checkpoints now include input statements and definitions automatically.

The 'libraries' attribute has been removed.
Checkpoints still doesn't work, though.

* 1.50

** Minor reference manual enhancements.

It will now state if submodel as a full or partial value.

* 1.48

** Fix 'monthly' and 'yearly' conditions.

Used to match every hour in the month or year, except the last.
Reversed that.

** You can now log applied fertilizer.

Use the new 'Fertilizer' log model, defined in 'log.dai'.

** Fix loading global files (bug introduced in 1.47).

* 1.47

** New default SMB and SOM parameters. 

These should have little effect on mineralization, but give a more
realistic estimate of the size of the SMB pools.

It *will* have a large effect if you are running without a starting
period, and have large initial AOM pools.

** New fertilizer types in 'fertilizer.dai'.

** More work on the winter wheat and winter barley parameterizations.

* 1.46

** Fixed link order dependency crash (MAYBE).

* 1.45

** Fixed crash related to the am/cleanup AOM introduced in 1.40.

** Defaults for the 'minimum', 'from' and 'to' precision fertilize params.

* 1.44

** New 'first_year_utilization' fertilizer parameter.

Use this together with the new 'equivalent_weight' fertilize
parameter, to let Daisy calculate the amount on organic fertilizer to
apply, to get an inorganic nitrogen equivalent.  Example:

  (fertilize (pig_slurry (first_year_utilization 0.20))
             (equivalent_weight 50.0)) ; kg N/ha

Here, we specify that 20% of the nitrogen (organic or inorganic)
contained in pig slurry can be utilized the first year, and that we
want to fertilize with an amount of pig slurry corresponding to 50 kg
N/ha.  Daisy will then apply, say, 3 ton DM/ha pig slurry, depending
on the N content of the slurry.

** New 'precision' fertilize parameter.

This allows you to let the amount of fertilizer you apply depend on
the nitrogen content of the soil in a specified zone.  Use it like
this: 

  (fertilize (n50)
             (precision (target 150.0) ; kg N/ha
                        (minimum 50.0) ; kg N/ha
                        (from 0.0) (to -100.0)))

Daisy will measure the amount of fertlizer in the specified zone (from
the soil surface to 100 cm depth), and supply enough extra nitrogen to
reach the specified target (150 kg N/ha).  If less than minimum (50 kg
N/ha) nitrogen is needed in order to reach the target, no fertilizer
will be applied.

You can use the 'precision' parameter with organic fertilizer as well,
in that case you must also specify the 'first_year_utilization'
fertilizer parameter. 

* 1.43

** New 'set_subsoil_irrigation' action.

For irrigating directly in the soil.  Unlike the other irrigation
actions, this one specifies a permanent flux.  This means the
irrigation will continue until you explicitly turn it off by
specifying a flux of zero.

Use it like this

    (set_subsoil_irrigation 1.5 (from -5.0) (to -10.0)
                            (solute (NH4 0.1) (NO3 0.7)))

This will specify an irrigation flux of 1.5 mm/h to be incorporated in
the soil between 5 and 10 cm depth.  The water will contain 0.1 mg
NH4-N/liter and 0.7 mg NO3-N/liter

If you call 'set_subsoil_irrigation' multiple times, the last call
will have effect.

Use

    (stop_subsoil_irrigation)

to turn off subsoil irrigation.

** Changed irrigation solute units from g/mm to mg N/liter.

* 1.42

** 'irrigate_top' action changed to 'irrigate_overhead'.

The old command is still available for compatibility reasons, but
marked obsolete and will be removed in at future version.

Also, the 'irrigation_top' log variables in the 'default' bioclimate
model hgave been renamed to 'irrigation_overhead'.  The 'log.dai' file
has been updated accordingly.

* 1.41

** New 'NEWS' file.

Read this to keep track of Daisy.

** Changed default log file ending from '.tab' to '.dlf'.

Those log files that contains a header now end with '.dlf' instead of
'.tab'.  This affects the build-in 'harvest' log model, as well as all
the 'table' parameterizations found in 'log.dai'.  The 'PMSW'
parameterization uses the old 'table1' log model, doesn't have a
header, and still output to 'pmsw.tab'.

** SoilNO3 and SoilNH4 now have default values.

You no longer have to specify the initial nitrate and ammonium content
when using the 'default' column model.

By default, the nitrate concentration in the water will be half of the
WHO recommended maximum for drinking water, i.e. 50 mg NO3 per liter.
The total ammonium content will a tenth of that.

Suggested by: SH.

* 1.40 

** New 'repeat' action.

The 'repeat' action take a single unnamed argument, which itself
should be an action.  That action will be repeated from the start, as
soon as it is finished.  If you for example have defined a 'sbarley'
manegement strategy, and you want to keep growing spring barley for
ever and ever, you can specify the manangement like this

        (manager (repeat sbarley))

More likely, you will use a 'while' to limit the repetition.

        (manager activity
           (while (wait (at 1998 7 7 1))
              (repeat sbarley))
           stop)

This will keep growing spring barley until 7/7 1998.

** New 't' action.

The 't' action will do nothing, just like 'nil', but will never be
"done".  This means that

        (while t (activity sbarley stop))

will do the same as

        (activity sbarley stop)

** New 'am/cleanup' AOM pool.

Small AOM pools will be merged into the 'am/cleanup' pool instead of
being mineralized instantly.  This way we avoid mysterios "spikes" in
the mineralization log data when small AOM pools are discarded.  

** Fixed log after 'default' crop get ripe.

In the 'default' crop model, production and respiration halts after
the crop gets ripe.  However, the last active production and
repsiration values would continue to be logged.  Now, these are
zeroed.

Bug found by: SH.

** Surface irrigation didn't work.  Now it does.

Surface irrigation was ignored.  Now it is applied correctly.

Bug found by: Mette Lægdsmand <Mette.Laegdsmand@agrsci.dk>

** Fixed numeric error in the 'default' bioclimate model.

The symptom was a rare assertion failure.

Bug found by: SH.

* 1.38

** New 'inorganic' column model.

Works like the 'default' model woth regard to water and soil
chemicals, but does not keep track of organic mater or nitrogen in the
soil or surface.  The crops will always have potential N uptake.

** 'Surface Water Balance' now logs production stress.

* 1.37

** New 'vegetation.dai' file, for permanent vegetation parameterizations.

** Fix 'PMSW' log, broken by changes in 1.36.

** Use 'S_external' to log incorporated stuff.

The 'N Balance' and 'Soil Chemicals' logs are updated to do this.

* 1.36

** Log at end of the day.

This means that the data in the daily log files now corresponds to the
day listed.  The used to correspond to the previous day.  Fixed
'daily', 'weekly', 'monthly' and 'yearly' conditions to always match
the last hour in the period.

* 1.35

** A zero stress factor now means no stress.

Previously it went maximum stress.  Specifically, the meaning of
'water_stress' and 'nitrogen_stress' has been inverted.  Zero is no
stress, one is full stress.

** SVAT model integration changes.

The 'PMSW' svat model give feedback
to the rest of the system, by calculating a 'production_stress' which
will be used instead of 'water_stress'.

* 1.33

** SVAT model integration changes.

The 'PT' parameter of the 'default' bioclimate model is gone, instead
there now is a 'svat' parameter.

** The 'crop' action fixed so it no longer will harvest before sowing.

The symptom was that a crop was skipped when started at the wrong
time. 

Bug found by: HS.

* 1.32

** Optional parameters of the 'crop' action wasn't optional.

Now they are.

Bug found by: HS.

* 1.30

** Fix compilation with Borland C++ 5.01.

* 1.29

** Default value for 'dispersivity' (6.0 cm).

** Default value for 'rs_min' is now 30.0 s/m.

* 1.28

** New 'permanent' vegetation model.

It is intended for column on a multi-column simulation where we have
very little knowledge, basically we just need to know the LAI at
different times of the year.

* 1.27

** Column specific weather.

It is now possible to have separate weather for each column.  You can
still have a global weather, it will be used as default for columns
where no weather have been specified.

* 1.26 

** Log files now print a header.

Specifically, the 'harvest' and 'table' log models will now -- by
default -- create a header containing information about the data.

** New 'simple' crop model.

Intended for crops where we have no knowledge of reactions to water or
nitrogen stress.

* 1.24

** New Bentazon, IPU, and MCPP parameterization in 'chemistry.dai'.

** The 'crop' action now supports spraying.

** Added support for ridging.

* 1.23

** Log and harvest dead leaves.

* 1.22

** Added domain and range for PLF's in reference manual.

* 1.21

** Renamed CSMP to PLF.

* 1.19

** New 'fixed' and 'deep' groundwater models.

* 1.18

** New 'set_heat_source' action.

Use this to make a football field green a larger part of the year.

* 1.17

** New 'set_porosity' action.

Use this to change the porosity of the soil, to simulate the effect of
applying heavy machinery on the field.  Works only with the
'M_vG_compact' hydraulic model. 

** New 'M_vG_compact' hydraulic model.

This one has variable porosity.

** New 'set_detention_capacity' action.

This one is intended for simulating changed to the soil surface
ruggedness. 

* 1.14 

** New 'AOM' log model.

To keep track of a specific pool of added organic matter.

* 1.10 

** Use 'volatilization' instead of 'NH4_evaporation' in AM.

* 1.08

** Made heat and moisture influence user setable.

Affects mineralization, nitrification, and denitrification.

* 1.07 

** Made soil chemicals mix with surface chemicals.

* 1.06

** Added bioincorporation of organic matter from surface to soil.

* 1.05 

** New 'crop' action.

This action specifies a strategy for managing a specific crop or
multicrop.  To create a crop rotation, you can combine these 'crop'
action sequenctially using the 'activity' action.

* 1.04

** New 'lysimeter' groundwater model.

* 1.00

** New 'max', 'min' and 'average' selections for the 'table' log model.

** New 'assert', 'message', 'warning', and 'error' actions.

* 0.99

** Added surface runoff.

Controlable with the new 'DetentionCapacity' and 'ReservoirConstant'
surface parameters. 

** Added mixing of inorganic nitrogen between surface and soil.

* 0.96

** New 'fodderbeet' crop parameterization.

** New 'default' weather model.

