WP5 leader:

Focus this year has been on finalizing the setups for the WP1 sites
for M5_3 and D5_3, as well as for use in scenarios in WP6.  Compared
to earlier years, this year more focus was on the crop calibration.
Also, initial setup files for the 2005 experiments were required
earlier.  A soil and crop parameterization for use in WP6 was to be
delivered by all WP1 sites by 2005-11-15, and the final soil and crop
parameterization was to be delivered by 2005-12-31.  

These deadlines were meet to a large degree.  As decided the previous
year, Partner 6 took over crop calibration for partner 8, and partner
10 visited partner 4 in order to help with the crop calibration.  At a
modelling workshop in Udine, partner 1 and 10 provided support in
calibrating Daisy for the remaining partners.  

Several draft of D5_3 have been uploaded to the fertorganic homepage,
and we are likely to meet M5_3 by delivering D5_3 on schedule.


Partner 10:

Research:

WP3 and WP4: 

Partner 10 have participated in the development of the DSS rules,
along with partner 1 and partner 5.  In particular, partner 10 has
ensured that the calculation of evapotranspiration is the same in the
DSS system and Daisy, and developed the mineralization model used in
the DSS.  Partner 10 also hosted a DSS workshop with participation of
partner 1 and 5.

WP5:

Partner 10 has provided email support for the other partners for
creating the initial site specific Daisy setups (milestone MP5_2).
Partner 3 hosted a workshop in Udine where partners 10 and 1 helped
partners 5, 3 and 12 create an initial site specific Daisy setup.
Partner 10 hosted a workshop where they helped partner 1 reach
milestone MP5_3.  Partner 10 provided the initial Daisy setup for
Partner 2 who was indisposed.

Based on experienses from the email support and workshops, partner 10
has improved Daisy so it is more robust, more flexible, better
documented and simpler to use.  Partner 10 also developed an initial
potato parameterization based on SCRI data to be used as a starting
point for the other partners.  

Partner 10 ensured that initial setups from the other partners were
submitted, organized these setups in a common and consistent
framework, and uploaded this framework to the www.fertorganic.org
site.  

Troubles and delays:

Late delivery of the WP1 databases continued to be a problem.  Late
deliveries of the initial Daisy setups made the organization work more
difficult, and left to little time to do any analyze work.  Partner 2
never delivered an initial Daisy setup, which ment partner 10 had to
do the additional work of creating one.  The WP1 database from partner
2 had significant errors which made that work more time consuming than
necessary.  Partner 4 never delivered the initial Daisy setup, which
prevented us from meeting MP5_2.  
